---
layout: post
title: The Duties of Scientists
tags: science
excerpt: What should be condemned aren’t the moral wrongs of a few individuals. It’s a culture, which most STEM students are currently immersed in, that needs to be reexamined—the one that prioritizes what sounds cool and what pays more, instead of finding out what benefits the society the most in the long term.

---
We are living in an era when scientific research, like trade and manufacture, has grown into a sophisticated social activity—flourishing, dynamic, and highly organized. The thrill of glancing through publications on high-profile academic journals can only be matched by that of watching fluyts sailing into and out of the 17th-century Amsterdam or Model Ts coming off the 1920s Ford assembly line. But the prosperity of science doesn’t provide straightforward answers to two classes of questions: those on the origin of science and those on its destination—namely, _why we do science_ and _what science is used for_. We’ve been forced to reconsider the relation between science and human society by a series of disconcerting events, which are, in recent years, becoming more perplexing.

A few days ago, it was announced that two gene-edited babies have been born in China. Interestingly, the academia and the market reacted oppositely to this controversial leap: Scientists around the world are overwhelmingly denouncing this clinical application as irresponsible, unethical, and medically unnecessary. But investors seemed to find the smell of success—top stocks on gene-editing technology unanimously traded higher. Accessible information indicates this in-human trial is most likely to be funded by private capital and aimed at commercial interests. And the so-called “unexpected leakage” of results is in fact carefully orchestrated. Notably, this one-year-and-nine-month experiment would be impossible without an interdisciplinary team including experts in gene editing, sequencing, in vitro fertilization, animal testing, financing, and publicity, as well as the participation of an HIV care organization and the permission from medical regulation agencies. All these professionals collaborated quietly and introduced the twins to our world, without realizing the mark they would add to the timeline of human evolution. 

But to me, the Theranos case—first revealed in 2015 and still under investigation—is even more terrifying: a nine-billion-dollar biotech unicorn could be built entirely on deception, and yet had won enormous acclaims—a charismatic young founder, a “revolutionary” blood-testing technology, over 700-million-dollar investment, a board of directors including seven eminent statesmen, and in every aspect, a new Silicon Valley miracle. Science, medicine, business, law, and media—most brilliant inventions of human beings—were maneuvered by their best practitioners to mislead doctors, endanger patients, and defraud investors in the name of ideas, innovations, and “changing the world.” The meticulously designed fraud could be continuing had it not been for an investigative reporter with _The Wall Street Journal_ and a brave young man—the grandson of a Theranos trustee and former US Secretary of State.

Technological hypes have never appeared so frequently while being keenly applauded. What should be condemned aren’t the moral wrongs of a few individuals. It’s a culture, which most STEM students are currently immersed in, that needs to be reexamined—the one that prioritizes _what sounds cool_ and _what pays more_, instead of finding out _what benefits the society the most in the long term_. We are surrounded by the view that the ultimate goal of scientific research is commercialization. We are being indoctrinated in a narrow definition of success that puts impact, fame, and reward ahead of anything else. We might occasionally find our education distanced from the basic mission of science—to answer, to our best knowledge, _what is true_, _what is not true_, and _what we don’t know_.

Personally, I can foresee a tragedy if science is one day dominated by the rules of the business world and loses the values of its own. An often overlooked point is: at the most fundamental level, science reshapes the world not because it makes people more productive, creative, or competitive—though it does—but because while establishing it people learn to be respectful to truths. Outside their laboratories, scientists have to watch closely how the knowledge they created is applied to the real world. They shoulder the obligations to prevent science from being misinterpreted or misused, and to ensure that our greatest intellectual endeavor is serving the common good, or—as a tribute to an old address—of, by, and for the humanity. I say the most irreplaceable role of scientists in the modern society is that of a navigator—leading the crew to catch the ocean currents and avoid the icebergs, and sharing their unbiased information on the best routes for the ship to move on.

