---
layout: post
title: Rethink the Programmed Life

excerpt: I feel a bit uneasy to see the cult of progress becoming autocratic—while stimulating the most vigorous minds, it imposes the pressure of abandoning originality and long-term goals for instant success, and evokes a sense of failure to those refusing to do so. <br /><br /> The foundation of education isn’t the acquisition of professional skills, nor the so-called critical thinking and problem-solving. It’s the formation of values—underivable yet influenceable guidelines on what we appreciate and distain, and what motivates us to think and act. <br />

tags: life
---
It’s the first week of a new year. Looking back, historians have attached tags to the distinct epochs of modern history: the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, the Industrial Age, the Information Age, etc. While it’s premature to anticipate what’s coming next, the new millennium does reveal a few signatures, among which is the near-frictionless flow of common knowledge. “Journal” and “encyclopedia” are now more frequently denoting websites than giant volumes in libraries. Tens of languages are being taught online for free. Advanced learning is no longer confined in classrooms. Even elite universities are opening their doors to the middle class and underrepresented groups. The general public have never been so close to understanding and contributing to the frontiers of human civilization. The creativities of our species are being unleashed to an unprecedented extent.

The accessibility of knowledge, together with the improvement in life quality and social equality, should, in principle, prompt a generation-wide desire for independent thinking and pioneering ventures. Yet it is hardly being epitomized by the graduates of higher education institutions in general, including those from the most prestigious universities. Another trend is nevertheless pronounced—standardization. Among my friends pursing non-academic careers, around nine out of ten choose finance, consulting, or information technology, regardless of their backgrounds in college or graduate school. A fraction of those staying in academia, instead of cherishing the privilege of free inquiry and organized skepticism, seem to be more devoted to the cyclic game of grant-applying, result-producing, publishing, and advertising, to whom solid knowledge is merely a byproduct of their arduous work. Alternative options are occasionally considered as “unconventional” career paths, which may arouse curiosity, if not sympathy, among the ones in “mainstream” industries.

One has no reason to be disturbed if all these choices are based on clear self-awareness. In fact, a large fraction of them are not. In 1883, when addressing at the American Association for the Advancement of Science, physicist Henry A. Rowland pondered the fate of human creativity in the midst of the Second Industrial Revolution:

>Man is a gregarious animal, and depends very much, for his happiness, on the sympathy of those around him; and it is rare to find one with the courage to pursue his own ideals in spite of his surroundings. … To-day the railroad and the telegraph, the books and the newspapers, have united each individual man with the rest of the world: instead of his mind being an individual, a thing apart by itself, and unique, it has become so influenced by the outer world, and so dependent upon it, that it has lost its originality to a great extent.

Rowland mourned the past ages of masters, but failed to foresee more great minds would emerge in the following century. However, what he pointed out as the suppression of individuality due to ubiquitous connections isn’t far from the truth. But it shouldn’t be simply attributed to the indecisive nature of human minds—through industrialization, a new “cult of progress” was formed, worshiping productivity, fortune, and competition. Followers are supposed to play according to the rules, contributing one’s time and intelligence in exchange for payment and recognition. A reward system was set up, acclaiming those outperforming their peers and elevated along the ladder. Those reluctant to join are marginalized economically and socially. Nowadays, such systems are governing almost every sophisticated profession—business, technology, politics, law, as well as a substantial portion of academic research. 

One has to acknowledge that, in almost every aspect, the development of modern society has been accelerated by the cult of progress. But I feel a bit uneasy to see it becoming autocratic—while stimulating the most vigorous minds, it imposes the pressure of abandoning originality and long-term goals for instant success, and evokes a sense of failure to those refusing to do so. Across the intellectual spectrum, pioneering accomplishments are rarely fruits of hypercompetition, opportunism, or populism. Instead, they are more likely to be crafted by genuine passion, determination, and the ability to pinpoint truly significant problems.

Decisions are left for us to make. As far as I’m concerned, the foundation of education isn’t the acquisition of professional skills, nor the so-called critical thinking and problem-solving, even if they can be well-defined. It’s the formation of values—underivable yet influenceable guidelines on what we appreciate and distain, and what motivates us to think and act. If there happen to be a voice yearning for more than a programmed life, why not listen to it and see what it leads to. After all, its chance to survive, given the overall prosperity and openness of the new millennium, should exceed that at any time in the past. And we might be able to taste a pleasure not accessed by many—rather than merely winning or profiting, being how we boastfully call ourselves: _sapiens_. <br />

